TIL-20180302.md

## Today I started learning python using Jupyter notebooks

Why? I'm co-organising an open data day event in Cambridge tomorrow. My goal is to build my first Jupyter notebook, and do a data viz in Python. So today I'm preparing my laptop environment for this.

### Resources for learning

Recommended from Anaconda as intro: https://www.datacamp.com/courses/intro-to-python-for-data-science
(4 hrs)

Python crash course - Eric Matthes (textbook)
Projects at the back: Project 2 = data visualization.

Five quick and easy data visualisations with python:
https://towardsdatascience.com/5-quick-and-easy-data-visualizations-in-python-with-code-a2284bae952f

### Platform to learn in: JupyterLab

Brand new v1.0; likely to replace Jupyter notebooks in time so started straight with this.
https://blog.jupyter.org/jupyterlab-is-ready-for-users-5a6f039b8906

Feeling excited!!

### Setting up the environment

1. Install Anaconda as a platform for local Jupyter notebook and dependency management

Anaconda for Python 3.6 (latest)

Docs, including cheatsheet https://docs.anaconda.com/anaconda/user-guide/cheatsheet

2. From Anaconda Navigator, launch JupyterLab.

Fail.

Error return says I need to install nodejs.

2. Install packages

Open Anaconda prompt

> conda install nodejs

y to install nodejs 8.9.3

Apparently there is also an update to conda available (I have 4.4.10; 4.4.11 is available).

> conda update -n base conda

Done

Relaunch JupyterLab from Anaconda Navigator... SUCCESS

Python crash course also recommends I install matplotlib

> conda install matplotlib

Already installed.

3. Get started with jupyterlab

Not sure where to start. Readthedocs: http://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/latest/

/Interface --> sounds like I just need to start a new session

Oh, so the launcher in JupyterLab is showing me my local directory tree. Navigate to my docs > new folder for Jupyter-python work. In that folder, launch new notebook.

4. hello,python.ipynb

Notebook: [Hello,python](/notebooks/hello,python.ipynb)

Each line block you add is a cell. Option at top to change between markdown and code for cell. Write text in markdown, code in code. Simples.

Try simple arithmetic 3 + 3, run, returns 6.

Time for some simple dataviz. I'm following Python crash course project combined with Medium blog and some improvisation.

Notes:
* Before learning to import data from elsewhere, I'm starting with an array of square numbers.
* Using matplotlib. Once I've imported it in one cell, no need to repeat in later cells.
* To play with labelling axes, etc. --> note I've set my JupyterLab theme as night/dark. So when I first ran this I couldn't see the axes labels and title, since default color is black. Tried adding fontcolor='white' after fontsize - wrong. Tried color='white' and it worked for the text and tickmarks. Also need to change colour of the xes values: labelcolor='white'.
  * Note "text" - the text within could be any format, program just repeats in; 'text' - the text within is a string, defined as such and recognised, so 'white' is recognised as meaning white, whereas "white" is not recognised, could mean anything.
* I've only given it an array of square number results (y), so it's assumed x values start at 0 and thus now 4^2 is showing as 25. Provide the x-values too (x_input) to shift it to be correct. The order you specify this in the plot command matters --> always x,y.

5. Use open data from external source - download

Ok, now I've got myself started with plotting, I need to prepare for using open data.
Having had my bike nicked before, it would be interested to look at cycle theft data in Cambridge.

Data.police.uk has data on crime around the country. I download Jan 2017-Dec 2017 crime for Cambridgeshire police and City of London (as a comparator) with outcomes data too --> 8.1MB zip file containing each month's crime report and outcomes data for each location.

First job tomorrow may be some wrangling to add these files together and make month a column factor. Or I could try with the API: https://data.police.uk/docs/

6. Use open data from external source - API

The benefit here is that the API call can return the most up-to-date call, and can query the database directly instead of downloading local files.

#### Keyboard shortcuts:
* Shift+enter to run a cell
* Use markdown to make titles
* Others: pen settings tab and show keyboard shortcuts in raw view. Reading that --> tells you shortcuts. Note "Accel" is ctrl key. Useful ones:
  * A = inserts cell above --> not sure what I need to press to make this work
  * B = inserts cell below --> not sure what I need to press to make this work
  * Fn + Y = turns cell into code
  * Fn + M = turns cell into text
  * Ctrl + B = toggles the left pane (document tree) show/hide


### outcomes

- [x] I have my environment ready on my laptop to start to play with data using Python in JupyterLab.
- [x] I have set myself an open data investigation topic: bike theft crime in cambridge
- [x] I have downloaded some data to play with from data.police.uk


## Other: reminded myself how to navigate with keyboard

Because practice makes perfect

In Firefox: ctrl + tab to switch tabs
In Windows: ctrl + alt + tab to switch applications
In Atom: ctrl + shift + tab to switch tabs
