---
title: "TIL-20182805"
author: npscience
date: 2018-05-28T16:50:00.00Z
---

Aim: learn how to do simple generative design with algorithms using processing (and P5js [processing in the web browser])

Goals:
* Make a simple design for fabric printing
* Familiarise myself with loops in code

Resources:
* Openprocessing.org - browser-based sandbox
* Sample of beginner's book

# Simple Processing

## Set up the canvas

```
function setup() {
  createCanvas(width,length); #this is in pixels
  background('color'); #can use specified css colours (see w3c list) or number, e.g. 20 = grey, 200 = white
}
```

Also in setup, you can specify whether your object is circle or square or dot, and thickness, etc

Include noLoop(); if you only want to run the code once. Default is to continually run.

## Basic draw function

```
function draw() {
  #your drawing function goes in here
}
```


Defaults:
* fill = white
* line (stroke) = black, ... pixels

Example functions:
noStroke(); #removes stroke line / outline
noFill(); #removes fill colour
stroke('colour' or number);
strokeWeight(number);
fill('colour' or number); # shape fill colour
ellipse(x,y,diameter); # circle or ellipse with x,y centre and diameter pixels
rect(x,y,width,height); # rectangle with x,y top-left and x-width by y-length
line(x1,y1,x2,y2); # line connecting (x1,y1) to (x2,y2)

More 2D shapes at https://p5js.org/reference.

## Positioning

Processing uses graph coordinates (x,y) in pixels. Note that processing (0,0) is top-left of the canvas (not bottom-left)

mouseX and mouseY are understood as your mouse coordinates

### Draw a circle

```
function draw() {
  ellipse(x-centre,y-centre,diameter);
}
```

e.g. 400,300,200 --> circle of 200 pixel diameter centred at (400,300) in your canvas

### Draw an ellipse

```
function draw() {
  ellipse(x-centre,y-centre,x-diameter,y-diameter);
}
```

## Using algorithms

### Random

You can make any number be computed randomly instead of input, using the random() function,

e.g.
  ellipse(100,100,rand(50));

makes a circle at (100,100) with a diameter between 0 and 49.999 (not 50, as this is the upper bound specified in the function). Note that processing rounds decimals anyway.
Random can include an upper and lower limit, or just an upper limit (and assumes lower is 0). Random can also choose from a list eg of colours, bound this in [] like so: fill(random(['black';'yellow';'grey']))

To only run this once, remember to include noLoop() in setup. You can create multiple objects in one run, just by repeating the line in draw function.

## Wrap up

Today I learnt how to draw simple shapes, positioned on a canvas, and instruct background, fill and stroke parameters (colour, strokeWeight). I learnt how to use random() and for loops.

Here's what I created:
 "Tutorial 2- random coloured circles" http://www.openprocessing.org/sketch/555935
 (OpenProcessing autolicenses under Creative Commons Attribution ShareAlike https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/GPL/2.0/)

# Video capture on Windows 10
Open Xbox app
Select window to capture
Windows + G --> open game bar, tick yes this is a game
Windows + alt + R to record active window, or do more via toolbar
